.TH MURPHI2XML 1
.SH NAME
murphi2xml \- Print the abstract syntax tree of a parsed Murphi model
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B \fBmurphi2xml\fR [\fB\-\-output\fR \fIFILE\fR | \fB\-o\fR \fIFILE\fR] \fIFILE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
The utility \fBmurphi2xml\fR is bundled with the model checker Rumur and can
be used to translate a Murphi model into its abstract syntax tree in an XML
format. See
.BR rumur(1)
for more information about Rumur or Murphi.
.SH OPTIONS
\fB\-\-help\fR or \fB\-?\fR
.RS
Display usage information.
.RE
.PP
\fB\-\-output\fR \fIFILE\fR or \fB\-o\fR \fIFILE\fR
.RS
Set the path to write the output XML to. If this argument is omitted, output is
written to standard out.
.RE
.PP
\fB\-\-version\fR
.RS
Display version information and exit.
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
rumur(1)
.SH AUTHOR
All comments, questions and complaints should be directed to Matthew Fernandez
<matthew.fernandez@gmail.com>.
.SH LICENSE
This is free and unencumbered software released into the public domain.

Anyone is free to copy, modify, publish, use, compile, sell, or
distribute this software, either in source code form or as a compiled
binary, for any purpose, commercial or non-commercial, and by any
means.

In jurisdictions that recognize copyright laws, the author or authors
of this software dedicate any and all copyright interest in the
software to the public domain. We make this dedication for the benefit
of the public at large and to the detriment of our heirs and
successors. We intend this dedication to be an overt act of
relinquishment in perpetuity of all present and future rights to this
software under copyright law.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED \[lq]AS IS\[rq], WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

For more information, please refer to <http://unlicense.org>
