.TH MURPHI2UCLID 1
.SH NAME
murphi2uclid \- translate a Murphi model to Uclid5
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B \fBmurphi2uclid\fR [\fB\-\-output\fR \fIFILE\fR | \fB\-o\fR \fIFILE\fR] \fIFILE\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
The utility \fBmurphi2uclid\fR is bundled with the model checker Rumur and can
be used to translate a Murphi model into a Uclid5 model. See
.BR rumur(1)
for more information about Rumur or Murphi.
.SH OPTIONS
\fB\-\-help\fR or \fB\-?\fR
.RS
Display usage information.
.RE
.PP
\fB\-\-module\fR \fINAME\fR or \fB\-m\fR \fINAME\fR
.RS
Set the name to use for the generated Uclid5 module. If you do not supply this,
it defaults to \fBmain\fR.
.RE
.PP
\fB\-\-numeric\-type\fR \fITYPE\fRR or \fB\-n\fR \fITYPE\fR
.RS
Set the Uclid5 type used for ranges, scalarsets and numeric literals. This can
be either \fIinteger\fR or a bit-vector type, for example, \fIbv8\fR. If this
option is omitted, either \fIinteger\fR or \fIbv64\fR is chosen automatically
based on the content of the input model.
.RE
.PP
\fB\-\-output\fR \fIFILE\fR or \fB\-o\fR \fIFILE\fR
.RS
Set the path to write the output Uclid5 model to. If this argument is omitted,
output is written to standard out.
.RE
.PP
\fB\-\-quiet\fR or \fB\-q\fR
.RS
Silence warning diagnostics.
.RE
.PP
\fB\-\-verbose or \fB\-v\fR
.RS
Report extra debugging information.
.RE
.PP
\fB\-\-version\fR
.RS
Display version information and exit.
.RE
.SH NOTES
Translation to Uclid5 is imprecise in the case where there is no direct Uclid5
equivalent for a Murphi concept. For example, an \fBundefine\fR statement in
Murphi has no equivalent in Uclid5. This is translated to a \fBhavoc\fR
statement. Obviously this is not exactly equivalent. However the hope is that in
real world models this achieves a similar effect. Namely, any read of an
undefined variable results in the verifier exploring unintended behavior. To get
reasonable utility out of translation of a model using \fBundefine\fR, you will
likely need an assertion-heavy model. Or, put another way, defensive programming
is advised.
.SH LIMITATIONS
The following Murphi concepts have no translation to Uclid5 and are rejected by
murphi2uclid:
.RS
.IP \[bu] 2
Aliases, in the form of declarations statements or rules
.IP \[bu]
The \fBisundefined\fR operator
.IP \[bu]
The modulo operator, \fB%\fR
.IP \[bu]
The left and shift shift operators, \fB<<\fR and \fB>>\fR
.IP \[bu]
Early return statements, with or without an expression
.IP \[bu]
Cover properties
.IP \[bu]
Liveness properties inside rulesets
.IP \[bu]
Cover and liveness statements
.IP \[bu]
A \fBclear\fR statement with a value of complex type as its argument
.IP \[bu]
Step sizes other than 1 in \fBexists\fR or \fBforall\fR expressions
.RE
.PP
Function calls within expressions are translated as if they were calls to
uninterpreted functions. Uclid5 does not support calling interpreted functions
(procedures, in Uclid5 terminology) this way. The desirable mapping
(uninterpreted function vs rephrasing the call site) cannot be determined
automatically. So it is left to the user to tweak or post-process the output, as
it will not be accepted by Uclid5 as-is.
.SH SEE ALSO
rumur(1)
.SH AUTHOR
All comments, questions and complaints should be directed to Matthew Fernandez
<matthew.fernandez@gmail.com>.
.SH LICENSE
This is free and unencumbered software released into the public domain.

Anyone is free to copy, modify, publish, use, compile, sell, or
distribute this software, either in source code form or as a compiled
binary, for any purpose, commercial or non-commercial, and by any
means.

In jurisdictions that recognize copyright laws, the author or authors
of this software dedicate any and all copyright interest in the
software to the public domain. We make this dedication for the benefit
of the public at large and to the detriment of our heirs and
successors. We intend this dedication to be an overt act of
relinquishment in perpetuity of all present and future rights to this
software under copyright law.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED \[lq]AS IS\[rq], WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

For more information, please refer to <http://unlicense.org>
