.TH MURPHI\(hyFORMAT 1
.SH NAME
murphi\-format \- reformat Murphi models
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B \fBmurphi\-format\fR \fBoptions\fR [\fIFILE\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmurphi\-format\fR is a utility bundled with the Rumur model checker. It can
be used to reflow the text of a Murphi model into a consistent indentation
style.
.PP
\fBmurphi\-format\fR intentionally has very few options. It aims to settle
style debates by simply mandating a universally disliked format.
.PP
No line length limit is applied. The content within comments is not reflowed. If
your input contains long expressions, these will appear as long lines in the
output. The intention behind this choice is to encourage users to outline long
expressions into functions.
.PP
See
.BR rumur(1)
for more information about Rumur or Murphi.
.SH OPTIONS
\fB\-\-debug\fR or \fB\-d\fR
.RS
Enable debug mode. This produces some extra output intended for developers who
are debugging \fBmurphi\-format\fR itself.
.RE
.PP
\fB\-\-help\fR or \B\-h\fR
.RS
Show this documentation.
.RE
.PP
\fB\-\-in\-place\fR or \fB\-i\fR
.RS
Write the output of reformatting back into the same path as the source. This is
only valid when one or more paths are given; it cannot be used when reformatting
\fBstdin\fR.
.RE
.PP
\fB\-\-output=\fR\fIFILE\fR or \fB\-o\fR \fIFILE\fR
.RS
Write output to the given path. By default, output is written to \fBstdout\fR.
.RE
.PP
\fB\-\-tab=\fR\fISTRING\fR or \fB\-t\fR \fISTRING\fR
.RS
Text to use as one tab worth of indentation. By default, this is two spaces.
.RE
.PP
\fB\-\-version\fR
.RS
Print \fBmurphi\-format\fR version and then exit.
.RE
.SH NOTES
To disable formatting for a specific section of code, special comments are
recognised:

.RS
.nf
.eo
rule begin
	x := y;
	y := z;
	-- murphi-format: off
	z := w; w := x;
	-- murphi-format: on
end;
.ec
.fi
.RE

Code between the \fBmurphi\-format: off\fR and \fBmurphi\-format: on\fR
comments will be preserved as-is. Note that these must be line comments, not
multi\(hyline comments. Additionally they must have the exact spacing shown, not
arbitrary white space between e.g. the \fB:\fR and \fBoff\fR.
.SH SEE ALSO
rumur(1)
.SH AUTHOR
All comments, questions and complaints should be directed to Matthew Fernandez
<matthew.fernandez@gmail.com>.
.SH LICENSE
This is free and unencumbered software released into the public domain.

Anyone is free to copy, modify, publish, use, compile, sell, or
distribute this software, either in source code form or as a compiled
binary, for any purpose, commercial or non-commercial, and by any
means.

In jurisdictions that recognize copyright laws, the author or authors
of this software dedicate any and all copyright interest in the
software to the public domain. We make this dedication for the benefit
of the public at large and to the detriment of our heirs and
successors. We intend this dedication to be an overt act of
relinquishment in perpetuity of all present and future rights to this
software under copyright law.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED \[lq]AS IS\[rq], WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

For more information, please refer to <http://unlicense.org>
